book/analysis/big-o-notation.md, before:

---
title: Big O Notation
collection: analysis
position: 2
layout: default.html
---

An algorithm is little more than a series of steps required to perform some
task. If we treat each step as a basic unit of computation, then an algorithm’s
execution time can be expressed as the *number of steps required to solve the
problem*.

This abstraction is exactly what we need: it characterizes an algorithm’s
efficiency in terms of execution time while remaining independent of any
particular program or computer.

How can we apply this abstraction to the summation algorithms shown earlier?

Looking back at our function `sum_of_n`, the most expensive unit of computation
seems to be variable assignment; if we count those, we could have a worthy
representation of the algorithm's execution time. There's an initial assignment
statement (`the_sum = 0`) that is performed only once, followed by a loop that executes (`the_sum += i`) a total of `n` times.

We can denote this more succinctly with function $$T$$, where $$T(n)=1+n$$.

The parameter $$n$$ is often referred to as the “size of the problem”, so we can
read this as “T(n) is the time it takes to solve a problem of size $$n$$,
namely 1 + $$n$$ steps.”

For our summation functions, it makes sense to use the number of terms being
summed to denote the size of the problem. Then, we can say that “The sum of the
first 100,000 integers is a *bigger instance* of the summation problem than the
sum of the first 1,000 integers”.

Based on that claim, it seems reasonable that the time required to solve the
larger case would be greater than for the smaller case. “Seems reasonable” isn’t
quite good enough, though; we need to prove that the algorithm’s execution time
is dependent on the size of the problem.

To do this, we’re going to stop worrying about the *exact* number of operations
an algorithm performs and determine the dominant part of the $$T(n)$$ function.
We can do this because, as the problem gets larger, some portion of the $$T(n)$$
function tends to overpower the rest; it is this dominant portion that is
ultimately most helpful for algorithm comparisons.

The *order of magnitude* function describes the part of $$T(n)$$ that increases
fastest as the value of $$n$$ increases. “Order of magnitude function” is a bit of
a mouthful, though, so we call it *big O* notation and write it as $$O(f(n))$$,
where $$f(n)$$ is the dominant part of the original $$T(n)$$. Big O notation provides a useful approximation for the *actual* number of steps in a
computation.

In the above example, we saw that $$T(n)=1+n$$. As $$n$$ gets larger, the constant
1 will become less significant to the final result. If we are simply looking for
an approximation of $$T(n)$$, then we can drop the 1 and say that the
running time is $$O(n)$$.

Let’s be clear, though: the 1 *is* important to $$T(n)$$ and can only be safely
ignored when we are looking for an *approximation* of $$T(n)$$.

As another example, suppose that for some algorithm, the exact number of
steps is $$T(n)=5n^{2}+27n+1005$$. When $$n$$ is small (1 or 2), the constant 1005
seems to be the dominant part of the function. However, as $$n$$ gets larger, the
$$n^{2}$$ term becomes the most important, dwarfing the other two terms in its
significance to the final result.

Again, for an *approximation* of $$T(n)$$ at large values of $$n$$, we can focus
on $$5n^{2}$$ and ignore the other terms. Similarly, the coefficient $$5$$
becomes insignificant as $$n$$ gets larger. We would say then that the function
$$T(n)$$ has an order of magnitude $$f(n)=n^{2}$$; more simply, the function
$$T(n)$$ is $$O(n^{2})$$.

Although we do not see this in the summation example, sometimes the performance
of an algorithm depends on the **exact** data values rather than just the size
of the problem. For these kinds of algorithms, we need to characterize their
performances as *worst case*, *best case*, or *average case*.

The worst case performance refers to a particular data set where the algorithm
performs especially poorly, whereas a different data set might have amazing
performance. In most cases, however, the algorithm performs somewhere in between
these two extremes, in what we kindly call the average case. Understanding these
distinctions can help prevent any one particular case from misleading us.

There are several common order of magnitude functions that will crop up
repeatedly as you study algorithms. These are shown in the table below. In order
to decide which of these functions is the dominant part of a $$T(n)$$ function,
we must see how it compares with the others as $$n$$ becomes larger.

f(n) | Name
--- | ---
$$1$$ | Constant
$$\log{}n$$ | Logarithmic
$$n$$ | Linear
$$n{}\log{}n$$ | Log Linear
$$n^{2}$$ | Quadratic
$$n^{3}$$ | Cubic
$$2^{n}$$ | Exponential

Below, we show graphs of the usual suspects from the above table. Notice that,
when $$n$$ is small, the functions inhabit a similar area; it hs hard to tell
which is dominant. However, as $$n$$ grows, they branch off in several directions,
making it easy for us to see how they compare with one another.

![](figures/big-o-plot.png)

As a final example, suppose that we have the fragment of Python code shown
below. Although this program does nothing useful, it is instructive to see how
we can take actual code and analyze its performance.

```python
a = 5
b = 6
c = 10
for i in range(n):
   for j in range(n):
      x = i * i
      y = j * j
      z = i * j
for k in range(n):
   w = a * k + 45
   v = b * b
d = 33
```

How many assignment operations does this code have?

Counting the operations is easier if we group them logically. The first group
consists of those three assignment statements at the start of the fragment,
which gives us the term **3**.

The second group lives in the nested iteration: three assignments performed
$$n^{2}$$ which produces the term **$$3n^{2}$$**.

The third term is **$$2n$$**: two assignments iterated $$n$$ times.

The final assignment gives us the constant **1** as the fourth term.

Putting those all together: $$T(n)=3+3n^{2}+2n+1=3n^{2}+2n+4$$. By looking at
the exponents, we can easily see that the $$n^{2}$$ term will be dominant; this
fragment of code is $$O(n^{2})$$. Remember that we can safely ignore all the
terms and coefficients as $$n$$ grows larger.

The diagram below shows a few of the common big O functions as they compare with
the $$T(n)$$ function discussed above. Note that $$T(n)$$ is initially larger
than the cubic function but, as $$n$$ grows, $$T(n)$$ cannot compete with the
rapid growth of the cubic function. Instead, it heads in the same direction as
the quadratic function as $$n$$ continues to grow.

![](figures/big-o-plot-2.png)

Commit message:

Make changes to analysis intro
* replace straight quote with curly
* move odd "intution" paragraph into Big O notation proper
* consolidate "method of analysis" paragraph with next one
* reinforce space/time themes; remove "memory"
* pluralize "function"; have to run both of them
* remove "list" of sources; feels weird

book/analysis/big-o-notation.md, after:

---
title: Big O Notation
collection: analysis
position: 2
layout: default.html
---

An algorithm is little more than a series of steps required to perform some
task. If we treat each step as a basic unit of computation, then an algorithm’s
execution time can be expressed as the *number of steps required to solve the
problem*.

This abstraction is exactly what we need: it characterizes an algorithm’s
efficiency in terms of execution time while remaining independent of any
particular program or computer. Now we can take a closer look at those two
summation algorithms we introduced last chapter.

Intuitively, we can see that the `sum_of_n` is doing more work; some program
steps are being repeated, and the program takes even longer if we increase the
value of `n`. But we need to be more precise than this.

The most expensive unit of computation seems to be variable assignment; if we count those, we could have a worthy representation of the algorithm's execution
time. There's an initial assignment statement (`the_sum = 0`) that is performed only once, followed by a loop that executes (`the_sum += i`) a total of `n` times.

Intuitively, we can see that the iterative program seems to be doing more work;
some program steps are being repeated, so the program takes longer. Also, the
iterative program takes more time to finish if we increase the value of `n`.

We can denote this more succinctly with function $$T$$, where $$T(n)=1+n$$.

The parameter $$n$$ is often referred to as the “size of the problem”, so we can
read this as “T(n) is the time it takes to solve a problem of size $$n$$,
namely 1 + $$n$$ steps.”

For our summation functions, it makes sense to use the number of terms being
summed to denote the size of the problem. Then, we can say that “The sum of the
first 100,000 integers is a *bigger instance* of the summation problem than the
sum of the first 1,000 integers”.

Based on that claim, it seems reasonable that the time required to solve the
larger case would be greater than for the smaller case. “Seems reasonable” isn’t
quite good enough, though; we need to prove that the algorithm’s execution time
is dependent on the size of the problem.

To do this, we’re going to stop worrying about the *exact* number of operations
an algorithm performs and determine the dominant part of the $$T(n)$$ function.
We can do this because, as the problem gets larger, some portion of the $$T(n)$$
function tends to overpower the rest; it is this dominant portion that is
ultimately most helpful for algorithm comparisons.

The *order of magnitude* function describes the part of $$T(n)$$ that increases
fastest as the value of $$n$$ increases. “Order of magnitude function” is a bit of
a mouthful, though, so we call it *big O* notation and write it as $$O(f(n))$$,
where $$f(n)$$ is the dominant part of the original $$T(n)$$. Big O notation provides a useful approximation for the *actual* number of steps in a
computation.

In the above example, we saw that $$T(n)=1+n$$. As $$n$$ gets larger, the constant
1 will become less significant to the final result. If we are simply looking for
an approximation of $$T(n)$$, then we can drop the 1 and say that the
running time is $$O(n)$$.

Let’s be clear, though: the 1 *is* important to $$T(n)$$ and can only be safely
ignored when we are looking for an *approximation* of $$T(n)$$.

As another example, suppose that for some algorithm, the exact number of
steps is $$T(n)=5n^{2}+27n+1005$$. When $$n$$ is small (1 or 2), the constant 1005
seems to be the dominant part of the function. However, as $$n$$ gets larger, the
$$n^{2}$$ term becomes the most important, dwarfing the other two terms in its
significance to the final result.

Again, for an *approximation* of $$T(n)$$ at large values of $$n$$, we can focus
on $$5n^{2}$$ and ignore the other terms. Similarly, the coefficient $$5$$
becomes insignificant as $$n$$ gets larger. We would say then that the function
$$T(n)$$ has an order of magnitude $$f(n)=n^{2}$$; more simply, the function
$$T(n)$$ is $$O(n^{2})$$.

Although we do not see this in the summation example, sometimes the performance
of an algorithm depends on the **exact** data values rather than just the size
of the problem. For these kinds of algorithms, we need to characterize their
performances as *worst case*, *best case*, or *average case*.

The worst case performance refers to a particular data set where the algorithm
performs especially poorly, whereas a different data set might have amazing
performance. In most cases, however, the algorithm performs somewhere in between
these two extremes, in what we kindly call the average case. Understanding these
distinctions can help prevent any one particular case from misleading us.

There are several common order of magnitude functions that will crop up
repeatedly as you study algorithms. These are shown in the table below. In order
to decide which of these functions is the dominant part of a $$T(n)$$ function,
we must see how it compares with the others as $$n$$ becomes larger.

f(n) | Name
--- | ---
$$1$$ | Constant
$$\log{}n$$ | Logarithmic
$$n$$ | Linear
$$n{}\log{}n$$ | Log Linear
$$n^{2}$$ | Quadratic
$$n^{3}$$ | Cubic
$$2^{n}$$ | Exponential

Below, we show graphs of the usual suspects from the above table. Notice that,
when $$n$$ is small, the functions inhabit a similar area; it hs hard to tell
which is dominant. However, as $$n$$ grows, they branch off in several directions,
making it easy for us to see how they compare with one another.

![](figures/big-o-plot.png)

As a final example, suppose that we have the fragment of Python code shown
below. Although this program does nothing useful, it is instructive to see how
we can take actual code and analyze its performance.

```python
a = 5
b = 6
c = 10
for i in range(n):
   for j in range(n):
      x = i * i
      y = j * j
      z = i * j
for k in range(n):
   w = a * k + 45
   v = b * b
d = 33
```

How many assignment operations does this code have?

Counting the operations is easier if we group them logically. The first group
consists of those three assignment statements at the start of the fragment,
which gives us the term **3**.

The second group lives in the nested iteration: three assignments performed
$$n^{2}$$ which produces the term **$$3n^{2}$$**.

The third term is **$$2n$$**: two assignments iterated $$n$$ times.

The final assignment gives us the constant **1** as the fourth term.

Putting those all together: $$T(n)=3+3n^{2}+2n+1=3n^{2}+2n+4$$. By looking at
the exponents, we can easily see that the $$n^{2}$$ term will be dominant; this
fragment of code is $$O(n^{2})$$. Remember that we can safely ignore all the
terms and coefficients as $$n$$ grows larger.

The diagram below shows a few of the common big O functions as they compare with
the $$T(n)$$ function discussed above. Note that $$T(n)$$ is initially larger
than the cubic function but, as $$n$$ grows, $$T(n)$$ cannot compete with the
rapid growth of the cubic function. Instead, it heads in the same direction as
the quadratic function as $$n$$ continues to grow.

![](figures/big-o-plot-2.png)
