graphs/the-knights-tour-problem.md, before:

The Knight’s Tour Problem
=========================

Another classic problem that we can use to illustrate a second common
graph algorithm is called the “knight’s tour.” The knight’s tour puzzle
is played on a chess board with a single chess piece, the knight. The
object of the puzzle is to find a sequence of moves that allow the
knight to visit every square on the board exactly once. One such
sequence is called a “tour.” The knight’s tour puzzle has fascinated
chess players, mathematicians and computer scientists alike for many
years. The upper bound on the number of possible legal tours for an
eight-by-eight chessboard is known to be $1.305 \times 10^{35}$;
however, there are even more possible dead ends. Clearly this is a
problem that requires some real brains, some real computing power, or
both.

Although researchers have studied many different algorithms to solve the
knight’s tour problem, a graph search is one of the easiest to
understand and program. Once again we will solve the problem using two
main steps:

-   Represent the legal moves of a knight on a chessboard as a graph.
-   Use a graph algorithm to find a path of length
    $rows \times columns - 1$ where every vertex on the graph is visited
    exactly once.

Commit message:

Mostly clean up Knight's Tour content - still requires code to be cleaned up

graphs/the-knights-tour-problem.md, after:

The Knight’s Tour Problem
=========================

The “[knight’s tour](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knight%27s_tour)” is
a classic problem in graph theory, first posed over 1,000 years ago and
pondered by legendary mathematicians including Leonhard Euler before
finally being solved in 1823. We will use the knight's tour problem to
illustrate a second common graph algorithm called depth first search.

The knight’s tour puzzle is played on a chess board with a single chess
piece, the knight. The object of the puzzle is to find a sequence of
moves that allow the knight to visit every square on the board exactly
once, like so:

![One possible knight's tour](figures/knights-tour.gif)

One such sequence is called a “tour.” The upper bound on the
number of possible legal tours for an eight-by-eight chessboard is known
to be $$1.305 \times 10^{35}$$; however, there are even more possible
dead ends. Clearly this is a problem that requires some real brains,
some real computing power, or both.

Once again we will solve the problem using two main steps:

-   Represent the legal moves of a knight on a chessboard as a graph.
-   Use a graph algorithm to find a path of length
    $$rows \times columns - 1$$ where every vertex on the graph is visited
    exactly once.
